Hops Humulus lupulus
Family: Cannabaceae
Common Names: Hops, hoppe, luplin, lupulus, lupula
Parts used: female fruits (strobiles), harvest when green and firm and covered with a yellow powdery resin
Forms and Dosages: 
Tincture- 1:5 (1:3-1:4 in 80-90% alcohol with fresh strobiles), 15-90 drops, up to 3x/day
Glycerite- 15-60 drops, up to 3x/day
Capsules- 2-4 “00” freeze dried capsules up to 3x/day
Tea: Hot or cold infusion, 4-8 oz up to 4x/day; can also be added to a bath 
Honey/Syrup- 1 tsp, 1-2x/day; add 20% alcohol to the total volume to increase shelf life, refrigerate syrup
Topical- hot poultice or fomentation; powdered hops can be applied for antimicrobial properties; medicinal oil (use alcohol as intermediary or use double boiler); tincture or glycerite can be used as liniment
Culinary- add to beers or beverages; young spring shoots can be eaten like asparagus, but avoid mature shoots
Vitalist Actions and Energetics: cold, dry, strong vital stimulant, relaxant, bitter tonic
Clinical Actions: Nervine, carminative, digestive bitter, galactagogue, antioxytocic, anaphrodisiac (especially for men), sedative, hypnotic, bitter alterative tonic, antispasmodic, aromatic, 
Constituents: volatile oils, bitter principles, resins, a chalcone, flavonoid glycosides, phenolic acids, tannins, lipids, amino acids, estrogenic substances
Primary Uses: Nervine and sedative and help with insomnia, nervousness, restlessness, and anxiety. Calms and soothes the nervous system. May intensify dreams. Tea, tincture, and/or bath can be an antispasmodic for skeletal and smooth muscle. Can also help with digestive cramps and digestive conditions aggravated by stress. Digestive bitter tonic that supports gastric secretions and reduces bloating and gas. Galactagogue. Antioxytocic, which can act as an anaphrodisiac, especially for men—specific for sleep problems associated with sexual excitement (nocturnal emissions, premature ejaculation, and hyper-sexuality). Fresh hops have an estrogenmimetic effect that could contribute to sexual suppressant and gynecomatisa in males who consume excess amounts. Large amounts of fresh hops may disrupt a menstrual cycle. Use topically for sore muscles, neuralgia, rheumatic joints, sprains, strains, and bruises; topical use can also serve as an anti-fungal for athlete’s foot, ringworm, tinea, or as a mild antibacterial. 
Cautions/Contraindications/Possible Adverse effects: Avoid use during pregnancy. May have estrogenic effects with consumed long-term or in frequent high doses; use caution when estrogen-sensitive conditions. Caution with combining with prescription sedatives, hypnotics, or antidepressants. Should be avoided in individuals with depression. Some people are allergic to the pollen and/or hairs on leaves, leading to contact dermatitis. 
Resources:
"Humulus lupulus,” pg. 55 in Herbal Actions Database
Moore, Michael: “Humulus” pg. 21 in Herbal Materia Medica- Fifth Edition
Sinadinos, Christa: “Hops,” pg 266-270 in The Essential Guide to Western Botanical Medicine
Skenderi, Gazmend: “Hops,” pg 196-197 in Herbal Vade Mecum
