Lemon Balm Melissa officinalis
Family: Lamiaceae
Common Names: Lemon balm, sweet balm, balm, blue balm, garden balm, English balm, common balm, heart’s delight, honey plant, cure-all, sweet Melissa, sweet Mary, balm mint, dropsy plant
Parts used: Leaves (preferably fresh)
Forms and Dosages:
Tincture-  10-90 drops, 1-4x/day (prepared from fresh leaves is preferable; 1:2-1:3 with 60-95% alcohol)
Glycerite- 10-60 drops, 1-4x/day
Acetum Extract- Infuse in vinegar for culinary use
Succus- Juice fresh herb and preserve with 20% alcohol; take 1 tsp 1-3x/day
Capsules- 2-4 “00” of freeze dried or recently dried powdered herb 1-3x/day
Tea- Hot or cold infusion with fresh or recently dried herb, 8-12 oz 3-4x/day; best to not use boiling water, and cover vessel so as not to lose the volatile oils
Honey/Syrup- Infuse with fresh, clean, macerated leaves, let steep for 2-4 weeks; 1 tsp of infused honey to hot water or tea; syrup shelf life = 1 month
Essential Oil/Hydrosol- Essential oil is expensive and can be substituted by lemongrass or palmarosa essential oil; consume 1-2 Tbsp of hydrosol 1-4x/day
Topical Use- fomentation, poultice, oil, or salve
Culinary Use
Vitalist Actions and Energetics: warm and dry, cooling diaphoretic, vital stimulant, relaxant, diffusive
Clinical Actions: Antibacterial, antidepressant, antispasmodic, antiviral, anxiolytic, astringent, cooling diaphoretic, nervine, sedative, stomachic, sudorific, carminative
Constituents: volatile oils, polyphenols, triterpenes, flavonoids, glucosides, tannins, bitter principles
Primary Uses: Nervine, mild sedative and relaxant that can help with soothing the nervous system, reducing stress and anxiety, and easing palpitations. Supports pre-menstrual irritability and anxiety. Calms an overactive mind and can help with tension headaches. Volatile oils affect the limbic brain, and have a gentle tranquilizing effect on fat autonomic nervous system. Mood elevator and supportive with depression, seasonal affective disorder, melancholy, PMS, and menopausal depression. Can support children and individuals with ADHD by supporting mental focus and clarity. Mild carminative, stomachic, and smooth muscle antispasmodic, especially for individuals with anxiety-related digestion issues. Hot water extracts have potent antiviral properties agains herpes simplex, mumps, and other viruses. Consuming lemon balm extract and applying fresh lemon balm leaf poultice, cream, or essential oil speeds the healing of herpes sores and reduces the rate of recurrence. Topical applications are most effective when used as early as possible. Hot tea is a cooling diaphoretic and will reduce fever in the first phase of a cold or flu; encourages restful sleep when ill. Has demonstrated hypothyroidal effects, and can help in treating early-stage hyperthyroidism or Grave’s Disease. Topical application acts as an astringent anti-inflammatory  and mild antimicrobial—apply to weeping toes, cuts, abrasions, bruises, sprains, strains, bites, or skin ulcers. 
Cautions/Contraindications/Possible Adverse effects: Theoretical caution with thyroid conditions; individuals with hypothyroidism should avoid long term use; theoretical caution with lactation/pregnancy, but may be permissible in small doses/infrequent use. Avoid use in formulas with herbs high in alkaloids (i.e. passionflower) because alkaloids precipitate tannins out of the solution. 
Resources:
“Melissa officinalis,” pg. 75 in Herbal Actions Database
Moore, Michael: “Melissa Officinalis” pg. 26 in Herbal Materia Medica- Fifth Edition
Sinadinos, Christa: “Lemon Balm,” pg 301-304 in The Essential Guide to Western Botanical Medicine
Skenderi, Gazmend: “Balm, Lemon,” pg 31 in Herbal Vade Mecum
