Motherwort Leonurus cardiaca
Family: Lamiaceae
Common Names: Lion’s ear, lion’s tail, throwwort
Parts used: leaves and flowers; harvest when in full bloom
Forms and Dosages: 
Tincture- 30-60 drops, 1-4x/day
Acetum Extract- 30-90 drops, 1-3x/day
Capsules- 2-4 “00” capsules, 1-3x/day
Tea- Hot or cold infusion; 4-8 oz, 1-4x/day
Honey/Syrup- 1 oz herb:16 oz. water, steep for 4-8 hours, strain and sweeten with honey or syrup; 1 tsp-1 Tbsp, 1-4x/day; refrigerate up to 1 month
Topical- apply hot fomentation to abdominal region to stimulate menses, reduce menstrual cramps, or facilitate expulsion of suppressed lochia
To Stimulate Onset of Labor- 10-30 drops of tincture, 1-3x/day up to one week prior to, to later than due date. When labor begins, take up to 30 drops, every 2-3 hours, up to 5x/day. Discontinue use immediately after birth. 
Vitalist Actions and Energetics: cool, dry, vital stimulant, relaxant, diffusive
Clinical Actions: antispasmodic, anxiolytic, bitter tonic, cardiotonic, deobstruent, emmenagogue, hypotensive, nervine, sedative, stomachic, hypnotic, astringent
Constituents: iridoids, volatile oils, phenolic acids, flavonoid glycosides, pheylethanoid glycosides, diterpenes, proline betaines, triterpenes, gluridosude, tannins, alkaloids, marrubiin, stachyose, phenolic acids
Primary Uses: nervine, anxiolytic, and moderate sedative; reduces symptoms of autonomic stress and hyperthyroidism, such as anxiety, hypertension, panic attacks, and insomnia; decreases heart rate, heart palpitations, and anxiety levels due to adrenergic and thyroid stress. Does not lower thyroid hormone levels in patients with Hashimoto’s or hypothyroidism. Cardio tonic, slows and strengthens heartbeat. Lowers mild to moderately elevated blood pressure. Helps ease depression due to stress or grief. Treats hormone imbalances resulting from PMS and pre menopause. Helps with night sweats, hot flashes, irritation, rage, and hormone-related emotional and physical hypersensitivity. Beneficial during the luteal phase (post ovulation to menses) for treating PMS and sensations of stagnant, boggy uterus. Emmenagogue, so helps with suppressed or slow-starting crampy menses. Moves stagnant blood. Can stimulate contractions and hasten delivery. Smooth muscle antispasmodic, specific for menstrual and abdominal cramping. Mild digestive bitter tonic, cholagogue, and laxative. Reduces gas and bloating. Helps with milk letdown; reduces postpartum depression, heart palpitations, and anxiety. Decreases nerve sensitivity, so aids in reducing neuralgia, neuritis, and the pain of herpes and shingles eruptions. 
Cautions/Contraindications/Possible Adverse effects: Caution with women who experience heavy bleeding during menses, after birth, or during perimenopause. Avoid use during pregnancy, except to facilitate labor. Caution in cases of hypothyroidism. Monitor uterine bleeding. 
Resources:
“Leonurus cardiaca” pg 65 in “Herbal Actions Database”
Moore, Michael: “Leonurus Cardiaca” pg. 24 in Herbal Materia Medica- Fifth Edition
Sinadinos, Christa: “Motherwort” pg 341-344 in The Essential Guide to Western Botanical Medicine
Skenderi, Gazmend: “Motherwort,” pg 253-254 in Herbal Vade Mecum
