Goldenrod- Solidago spp.
Family: Asteraceae
Common Names: Blue Mountain Tea, Woundwort, Aaron’s Rod, St. Peter’s Staff
Parts used: flowering tops
Forms and Dosages: 
Tincture- 1:5, 60%, 15-30 drops as needed
Infusion (hot)- 1:30, 1-3 oz. as needed, or in use as part of a flushing therapy (1 liter within 15 minutes 1x/day)
Vitalist Actions and Energetics: complex, slightly different based on species; S. canadensis is cool-cold with stronger bitter properties; S. odora is more neutral-warm; both are dry, bitter, tonic/astringent, kidney trophorestorative
Clinical Actions: diuretic, diaphoretic, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, mildly astringent, hemostatic, UT analgesic, anticatarrhal, antifungal, antispasmodic, styptic, vulnerary, antibacterial, immunomodulator
Primary Uses: S. odorra (Eastern U.S. species) and others can be aromatic, carminative, and antispasmodic; useful with acute or chronic infection or inflammation of the kidney; leaf medicine is mildly astringent and hemostatic; aerial parts are all mildly antiseptic and anti-inflammatory to bladder mucosa and tonic/astringent to the mucous membranes in general; nourishes and strengthens the kidneys; useful as a flushing out treatment for inflammations of the genitourinary tract, urinary gravel and non obstructive stones, to prevent recurrent UTIs/stones/gravel, for inflammations of the GI tract and upper respiratory tract
Constituents: flavonoids, triterpenoid saponins, phenol glycosides, diterpenes, phenolic acids, tannins, polysaccharides, volatile oil
Cautions/Contraindications/Possible Adverse effects: Caution in those with sensitivities to the Asteraceae family; caution in those already on strong diuretic medications; flushing-out treatment is contraindicated in cases 
Resources:
“Goldenrod,” pg. 4 in Urinary System Therapeutics and Materia Medica; CSCH Class Notes (2023)
Sinadinos, Christa: “Goldenrod,” pg. 246-248 in The Essential Guide to Western Botanical Medicine
Skenderi, Gazmend: “Goldenrod” pg. 175 in Herbal Vade Mecum
